[Music]
Hello and welcome to another episode of No Such Thing as a Fish, a weekly podcast coming to you
from four undisclosed locations in the UK. My name is Dan Schreiber, I am sitting here with Anna
Tyshinski, Andrew Hunter Murray and James Harkin and once again we have gathered round our microphones
with our four favorite facts from the last seven days and in no particular order, here we go.
Starting with fact number one, and that's my fact this week, my fact is whenever JFK flew
in Air Force One, he was sat in a rocking chair. Wow, that's clever, is it? So if there's any
turbulence you don't feel it because you just rock. Brilliant, really good point.
Did he have a special porch constructed inside Air Force One which he could put his rocking chair on?
That would be a great look. Now this was what's surprising that he had a rocking chair on a plane,
you'd think that's not very safe. Well also I would think, you know what's really annoying for a lot
of people on planes is when the person in front of you kind of leans back. What if they were constantly
leaving back and leaning forward and leaning back for the whole flight? Yeah, you're right,
that would be terrible, but also you'd be walloping your head into the chair in front of you.
You would have to basically everyone in the plane would have to be in sync and going forward or
backwards at the same time, wouldn't they? Yeah, well that's apparently a thing that does happen,
but maybe we'll get to that later. So wow, yeah fact. Tantalizing. So JFK, the reason he had a
rocking chair is because he had back problems, big back problems, and this was a result of his
years in the war, he developed these problems. And so a physician called Janet Travelle in 1955
said to him, why don't you do some swimming? But also why don't you try it a rocking chair?
And he tried it and he loved it so much that he had it everywhere. He got this one rocking chair
which he had in the Oval Office, he had it at his home, he gave it to friends, he had about 12 of them
and one of them was put on board Air Force One. And so any time he was flying anywhere,
that's what he would be saddened. Cool, very cool. Was it, do we know if it was rooted into the
ground or was it slipping all over the aeroplane? And also could he get a seatbelt on it? I've got
a lot of questions about how this works. I know, I had those questions too and I'm afraid there's
very scant detail of the, I guess you know, that's that sort of, you know, need to know basis
information. Sure, maybe you had a normal seat for takeoff and landing and then went onto it for the
That makes sense. I would have thought takeoff is the crucial moment when you won it and you
can really, because you tip right back, wouldn't you? Yeah, you want a hamster wheel really,
don't you, for the takeoff? I do. Yeah, you don't want the president to flip on takeoff.
These are a specific kind of rocking chair, aren't they? The thing called the Kennedy Rocker.
He didn't pick that because of the name, they're named after him, the specific model of chair.
But the really cool thing is there are now about 40 airports in the USA which have rocking chairs
in them, just in the terminal buildings and, you know, looking out over the planes and the
tarmac and all of this. And this is a huge trend and it's, it only started in the late 90s when
there was an exhibition at Charlotte Douglas International Airport. They had an exhibition
called Porch Sitting and there were loads of rocking chairs. And then at the end of the
exhibition, they removed them and people said, "What are you doing? We like those. We love
sitting in those chairs." So now they've spread across America and they're just everywhere.
And those are Kennedy Rockers. Exactly. Yeah, they're known as, well, that's the nickname,
they're Carolina Rockers. And yeah, they're perfect because they mean that you can just
move them wherever you need to. So if you just need to clean up. And just very good for putting
near a wall, near a wall plug for travellers. So yeah, they love it. Is it, what do you say,
you can move them wherever you need as opposed to normal chairs? Yeah, most chairs in airports
aren't movable. They're stuck to the ground, aren't they? Oh, well, I can't believe they don't get
stolen all the time. Yeah, but you're not going to be able to sneak that onto a plane, are you Anna?
You're not going to be able to get it underneath the seat in front, are you?
His back problems were terrible. I hadn't realised what a horrible, painful life he had.
And it's weird that he was recommended swimming, since it seems to be excessive swimming that
might have made them a lot worse in the first place. Oh, really? So he got, he was a really
sickly president. A lot of people say he's the sickest president, not in a cool way, that they've
ever had. Really? Yeah, there's been a bunch of studies done on his health recently. And he was
always in and out of hospital. I mean, who was it? Who was it who was in an actual wheelchair
and had a stroke? FDR, yeah. FDR, yeah. And who was the one who died like two days after?
Yeah, William Henry Harrison, yeah. He died after a month. Was he the sickest? Maybe. I don't know
if that's an illness. You didn't say, oh, God, I've just been diagnosed with having been shot in
the face. He wasn't shot. He died of a chill. He went to his inauguration without wearing a hat.
That's a good point. All right. Well, that's true. That's a new illness, not long lasting.
Yeah. I guess these neuroscientists haven't read up on all the histories of president's health,
but he was sickly and he had this terrible back, which was made worse when he fought in the war,
which he shouldn't have because he didn't pass the health test because of his health problems,
but his dad pulled some strings. And in 1943, he was in the Navy and his boat was struck by a
Japanese destroyer. And so it sank and the crew had to swim for almost six kilometers in order to
get to dry land. And not only that, but he swam while towing an injured crew member with him
between his teeth. So he got ahold of his life jacket and towed him between his teeth,
the six kilometers. And then the subsequent days, he had to keep swimming from island to island
until they were rescued. And they believe that made his back significantly worse. Well, it would.
You would have thought. So it seemed like a bit of a sick joke that the doctor then said,
have you tried swimming to fix it? Yeah, that's really good advice.
That doctor, though, Jeanette Travelle, what I like about her is she basically invented deep heat.
You know that stuff that when you're playing football, for me and other people doing other
sports, like you put it on and it kind of heats the inside of you. And it supposedly makes you
feel better if you've had a bit of a knock. Well, a lot of her research was about using these
vapor coolant sprays to relieve pain. And that's basically what deep heat is today. So she did
that. What is it? Deep heat. Well, it makes it burn so much. There's one that I have which is
used capsaicin. I don't know if that's deep heat or some jelly. Yeah, but I think they use different
chemicals. But yeah. Okay, right. That's cool. So if you're out of deep heat, you could just
rub some fresh chili into the affected area. Let's say, you know, I see a doctor first is what I'm
saying. I don't know. I actually think you can trust it. I actually think, Anna, you say the
swimming was the bad bit of advice. I think the prescription of a rocking chair was the worst
bit of advice because rocking chairs seem to be more dangerous to presidents than anything I can
see. So how many presidents, how many presidents, again, how many there's a slight history issue here,
more dangerous than assassinators, for instance. Well, how many, how many presidents have been
assassinated for right? Yeah, four, three of the four are very closely tied to rocking chairs. So
Jonathan Kennedy, the last chair that he sat in prior to that car chair was on Air Force One.
He was in his rocking chair. That was the last thing that he was on, and he loved his rocking
chair. William McKinley, another assassinated president, he campaigned the whole time in his
wicker rocking chair out on his front porch. That's where he did all of his pitching to be
president. And Abraham Lincoln was sitting in a rocking chair when he was assassinated.
What, the theater? Yeah, in Ford Theater, he was sitting in a rocking chair. So three of the four
presidents that have been assassinated have very close ties to rocking chairs. And I think that's
something we've not been reporting on as a society. James Garfield was actually on his way to open
a rocking chair factory. You know, you can visit if you want. And if you happen to be in Michigan,
the Lincoln rocking chair, and you can still see a dark spot on the back of it, which I think people
like to believe is blood from when he was shot. But it's actually, I think more disgustingly,
the hair oil from people repeatedly sitting in it in the early 1800s.
So Dan, what was it you were saying before about, you gave us a tease or something at the start,
didn't you? Oh, that's right. Yes. There's a report that I briefly scanned. So I'm afraid no further
details of the top headline here. But when people in rocking chairs see each other rocking next to
each other, they will naturally sink the rock. They will make the rock go at the same rhythm.
And I think we do that on bridges and so on, I've heard. Yes. Okay. So one of the reasons...
Will you be taking questions, Dan? Is that like you will?
This is the worst TED talk I've ever had. I did read the paper, Dan. And I read a few papers about
this because it is really interesting. And it's basically exactly like you say, apart from the
bridge part, which I've literally no idea what you're talking about. But yeah, if you put two
people in a room together with two rocking chairs, they will move and sink. And we're not quite sure
why they do it, but there are some clues. And we think it's probably that you're seeing someone
else do it and it's like the visual clues and you're subconsciously trying to get in sync with
someone else because you're empathetic with them. And one reason we think that is because actually
if you get autistic children, they don't do it. So if you get an autistic child and a non-autistic
child in a room and they're both sat on rocking chairs, the autistic child will not go and sink
with the other child. Interesting. Yeah, kind of interesting, isn't it? It's like when you walk
and sink with someone. You know, when you're walking down the street with a friend and then you
realise you're walking like a boy band or something. That's right. Just naturally. And if you do that on
a bridge, it can cause bridges to collapse. Oh, that's the thing. That's the issue. Did you guys
read about the world's largest rocking chair? No. No. It's big. I mean, there have been a few
world's largest rocking chairs. There's one called Big John. These are all in the States, by the way.
That was 32 feet tall, got the Guinness World Record. Very exciting. That got blown out of the
water by a 42 foot tall one in Fanning, Missouri, which had to be welded to the ground because
it was so clearly dangerous. Wait a minute. So that means it's not rocking? No, exactly. It's
controversy. But anyway, neither of those is now the world's largest rocking chair because in 2015,
a place called Casey, Illinois built a 56 foot tall rocking chair. And so the others have had to
rename themselves the former world's largest rocking chair, which is cool. And does that one
rock? Do you know? I think the Casey one does rock. And the Casey one, have you heard of Casey,
Illinois? I feel like I have, actually. I don't know why, though. I bet you've probably been there,
James, because it's also home to the world's biggest wind chime, biggest wooden shoes,
biggest knitting needles and a 200 kilo pencil. Their entire tourist economy is based on having
quite big things. And it's worked. They used to be really, the town used to be really broke. And
now they've got big things and they get tourists. It genuinely works. I've always thought because
obviously America has lots of these places all over it. If aliens did come to our earth after
it's been depopulated, they'd think that America was populated by giants. There was a species of
giants that lived in peace alongside the humans. And then also whenever they come to the UK and we
have all our muddle villages, they'll think that we are all tiny people. I'm speaking of America.
Have you heard about the 1901 rocking chair riots? No. Yes, I have. What a story. So this was all the
fault of this guy called Oscar Spate. And he was like a wheeler dealer wanting to make some money,
decided to move some rocking chairs into Central Park, place them all over it. So it was Central
and Madison Park in fact, place them everywhere. But the moment people sat in one, he installed
henchmen just so hiding out of sight, who would leap in front of you and say that'll be five cents
please, or three cents for the less comfortable ones. And people didn't like that. And the more
they complained, the more he installed more. And eventually it got out of hand when there was this
heat wave, someone who was feeling a bit faint sat in one of his rocking chairs and he got
yanked out from underneath him by one of this bloke's henchmen called Thomas Tully. And a massive
crowd chased Thomas Tully through Central Park and into a hotel shouting, "Linch him, linch him."
He had to run upstairs in the hotel to lock himself in one of the rooms until they'd gone away.
And then this mob marched through the streets of New York saying, you know, get rid of the chairs,
sort of smashing rocking chairs all over the place, singing the Marseillais. It was big stuff.
One of the problems was that they removed all of the normal seats. On this really hot weekend,
they'd removed all the normal seats for repairs on the same day. So all was left was his rocking
chairs. And so that's when it all kicked off. But they did try it for a bit afterwards. And there
was one worker who tried to collect some fees, but was stabbed by an elderly woman with a hat pin.
And then he thought, okay, well, what I'm going to do is I still want to do this because it's a
good business idea. And he got the idea from Europe, you know, like if you go to parks in London,
you might find there are deck chairs. He thought, I'm still going to go with this. And so he thought,
well, I'm going to get all my chairs in one little corner, and then I'm going to hire them out to
people, right? And then we won't have the problem of people accidentally sitting in there and us
saying five cents, please. And he did that. But then basically, as soon as they saw that,
all the unlockers started throwing stones at him and just like tried to get him out of the park.
And eventually he had to give up. But the park commissioner, the head of the park commissioner,
who was called George C. Claussen, who had kind of said yes to the thing in the first place,
said, okay, this is kind of all my fault. So he bought all the rocking chairs of this guy's spate,
and he put them in the park and wrote in massive letters free on them. And so people were allowed
to sit on them for free from then on. That's weird, because that would make me think I could just
take the chair. Yeah, we already established that you're a massive rocking chair thief.
I just got a perfect spot in the corner of my bedroom and needs a rocking chair.
Okay, it is time for fact number two, and that is Andy. My fact is that due to COVID-19,
the 2020-2020 Cricket World Cup will be in 2021, and the 2021-2020 will happen in 2022.
Amazing. So, yeah, this is just, this is a fact. It comes from the economists world in
2021, which is a sort of guide to the year ahead. 2020 is a kind of cricket. For those of you
listening who are not cricket fans, it's a kind of super fast, whizzy version of normal.
Yeah, so normal cricket, we play it for five days. And often there's no result.
Usually it's raining. And you just come back four days later and say, let's just call it a draw.
But this one, it's like really fast. It's over in two hours, 20 overs each. You're done.
Exactly. So they could have fitted in probably in 2019, but they should have done, but they
didn't. And it was going to happen in Australia. And then obviously in 2020, with COVID, the
International Cricket Council said that's going to be pushed forward. And India's hosting a 2021,
which is now happening in 2022. I don't know what's happening to the 2022 tournament.
I mean, surely at some point we're going to have to play two world cups in one year.
No. I think it's the reason that they don't rename it probably because they've already
printed all the merch. Oh, I don't know. There must be loads of merch from 2020,
which was printed. And what about all the, is it the Olympics that were going to be happening in
Tokyo? Again, they're still calling it the 2020 Olympics. Are they? That's going to be a little
nugget of confusion for historians in 200 years. It's also going to be huge anxiety for anyone
who had the worst year in 2020 when they see that popping up everywhere. But it's happening again.
Very triggering. Very triggering number. Yeah, cricket's been, well, it's been affected by COVID
much like everything else on earth, hasn't it? It's probably the main one.
I say it's the biggest sufferer. The main thing that seems to have happened to cricket,
everything is always like, you know, cricket's had a tavern yet, everything's had to change.
There's the saliva rule. And then that's pretty much it. Basically, you're not allowed to put
saliva on the ball anymore for very obvious reasons, which they used to do to shine the ball.
And what are they doing instead? Well, there are rules. So if that happens,
and the Empire sees you happening, he will have to sanitize the ball. Right. And then hand it back.
They should have a sort of sprinkler system between the two wickets, which is like a wall of
sanitizer that the ball passes through, like it's a car wash. That's a great idea. That's such a
good idea. So for the people who aren't into cricket, the reason you do this is you spit on
one side of the ball, you rub it against your pants, and it makes one side shiny. And the other
side not shiny, which makes it move in the air in a slightly unusual way, which can make it
difficult for the batsman. That's why you do that. And these days, what they do, I believe,
is you can do it with your sweat rather than with your saliva, I think. Wait, are you allowed
to do it with your sweat? I believe so, but I haven't looked that up, but I think that's right.
Interesting. So if you sweat on someone, they can't get Covid from that.
I think it's quite hard to transmit through sweat. I think so. It's harder. Right. Maybe
it's not impossible. But if you're playing cricket in winter, do you have someone just
sort of in a sauna, and he quickly runs out? That is one thing about cricket is it's very
much a summer spot. Yeah. What you have to do, if you're the team sweater, then you have to
constantly be getting into embarrassing situations and making awkward comments.
So you feel really awkward and then you sweat more. And then you've got, you know, you can
wring yourself out on that. And actually, weirdly, and this is very ironic, someone with Covid
would be sweating a lot because they'd have a fever. So they would ironically be the best
person to have in that role. Right. Catch 22. Catch 22 is a great name for a cricketing base
or a thriller, isn't it? Because there are 22 players in total. Oh, my God. Oh, really?
Hang on. Surely that's going to be what they're calling the 2022 2020 World Cup.
The 2021 2020 World Cup in 2022 is going to be called Catch 22.
There was a 2020 World Cup this year in cricket. Did it happen early?
It did. It was the Women's 2020, Women's T20. The final was Australia beating India in Melbourne,
and they had 86,174 spectators to watch that game, which is only 4,000 shots of the world record
of any women's sporting event in history. Wow. Which was the 1999 World Cup in California.
But Women's T20 is absolutely massive. It's big in the UK and big in Australia and India,
but actually all around the world, it's really big. So the next T20 World Cup,
they're going to have teams from Bhutan, Botswana, Malawi, Myanmar, Philippines, Argentina, Brazil.
And the reason that these countries have got really good women's teams is because,
if you think about it, let's say you're Brazil, for instance, and you're trying to bring cricket up
and you're trying to make it popular, it's going to be so hard for you to break into the men's game
because like the main men's teams have been going for hundreds and hundreds of years and,
you know, they're really entrenched at the very, very top. But the Brazilian women's T20 team,
they really do think that they have a chance to get into the finals and, you know, and maybe do
something because the best teams, obviously still England and India and Australia are good,
but they might be able to get into those lower echelons. So, yeah, really big in lots and lots of
countries. Sneaky. Coming in through the back door, we call that Fire the Wins game.
The first cricket World Cup was the Women's World Cup in 1973, in fact. So, people tend to say the
first cricket World Cup ever was 1975, but the ladies did it two years earlier. And I just mainly
like it because the captain of the women's team, of the England women's team at the time and the
instigator was called Rachel Hayhoe. That'd be brilliant if you're in the crowd and you
wanted to chant her name. Hey, Ho! Hey, Ho! The first ever international 2020 match
was also a women's game. Was it? Yeah. I don't really like to talk about it because England lost
against New Zealand. Against New Zealand? We won this one. Hayhoe won. So, we'll just discuss
this one till the cows come home. So, it was started when she convinced her pal Jack Haywood to
run Wolves Football Club and he was really up for it. He said, "Because it's quite simple.
I love women and I love cricket. What could be better than the two rolled together?"
And so, he bankrolled the whole thing. And they came and Australia came over and the only other
thing I could find about it in the match reports was that the Australian team in one of their off
days went to Longleat and the tournament report said they had a confrontation with an inquisitive
Rhino. That's all that happened. The first ever women's cricket match was in 1793.
97. It's a long time ago. That was 11 married women of Berry versus 11 unmarried women of Berry.
Were those team names? They were the teams, yeah. They were the team names.
It was always married versus singles. Yeah, what's that? It's not a single shaming thing in the
olden days of sports. Well, it's unmarried. So, can you have widows and virgins on the same team?
Yeah. Are they separate teams? I don't know. I don't know what the rules were, but
by technically speaking, by the look of it, it looks like you could.
I bet it was, this is a bit like, you know, cricketers who have dual nationality. I bet
widows could actually play for the singles or the married. They could probably decide.
Yeah. Well, you could defect by just marrying sort of just a fan, right?
Yeah. If you're on the unmarried team, you would want your best player to never meet anyone and
get married to them, wouldn't you? You'd be always, it'd be hilariously always trying to kind
of spoil all of their dates and stuff. That's really good. I think this is a good subplot,
maybe a B-plotline for catch-22 when we write a sports-based dramedy.
The married women of Burry, by the way, they were so good. They were absolutely amazing.
They were written about in Australian newspapers. They were so good.
And they offered to play any other women's team in the world for any sum. That's how confident they were.
Wow. One T20 match that I discovered, which has led me into a whole area of cricket I didn't
know existed, was the Blind Cricket T20. And that's obviously just a subsection of
General Blind Cricket, which is fascinating to watch. I'd never heard of it. And it's really
cool. There's 11 players on each team. And the idea is that four of those players are completely
blind. They're known as B1. And three players are partially blind, B2. And the final four,
partially sighted players, B3. And there's all these adaptions that they do to the sport to
make it work. So if you were the bowler, you would be bowling a ball, which is significantly
larger than a standard ball. And it's filled with ball bearings. So it's got audible cues for
you to hear it coming towards you if you can't see. And so if you're bowling as well, you have to
yell play so that they know that it's been thrown. So you know that you're ready to get it. You can't
be bowled out if you're completely blind. If it hits the wicket, so it has to be an LBW.
And usually the bowling is rolled on the floor, so you can hear those ball bearings going.
It's really fascinating to watch. And they do T20 as well. And Pakistan is where I discovered this
through their team. They won it, I think, in 2016. And yeah, there's lots of YouTube clips
to watch. It's very exciting. Very cool. So is the ball rolled to make it go more slowly?
I suppose. Or to make it audible. I think it's the audible time. Also to make it a lot safer,
probably. Because you probably don't want Jafaracha bowling at you, even if it does have
ball bearings in it, if you're blind. Yeah, exactly. I think it used to be rolled along
the ground until sort of mid 1800s. I think we've mentioned that. Yeah, I think certain
cheating Australians still have done that in history as well, but we won't go into it.
All right, let's move on. Have you heard of the longest match ever? So the T20 was obviously
a short format of cricket. The longest test match ever was 12 days long. And it still ended in a
draw. It was 1939. It was England, South Africa. It was called the Timeless Test, which used to
be a format of cricket where you just don't have to stop playing until someone wins. And the only
reason the match ended was the ship that the English team were booked onto was due to leave
South Africa. And in fact, it had already left, they were in Durban, I think it had already left
Durban. And they said, Oh, it's fine. We'll just get a train to Cape Town. Let's just keep playing
a couple more days and see if we can finish the match. And they still didn't finish it. It was
still a draw. And I think they ended the practice off. Yeah, I did read about that actually. And
it was getting really close. England only needed 42 more runs to win the game. And they had two
players left in. And so it was really getting close to a really exciting denouement. But they
were like, no, we're going to have to go. And at one stage, they considered leaving the two players
behind who was still in. Just everyone else going home to see if they could get over the line.
That's so funny. The longest, speaking of longest cricket things in South Africa,
the longest six was also in South Africa, the longest six ever hit apparently. And this was
Can we guess? Was it Chris Gale? What can you guess how long it was? Oh,
I thought who it was. I thought Andy was going to regale us with all the crickets, as he knows.
No way. I mean, I thought Chris Gale probably, but I didn't want to play it.
I can give you a clue as to who it was. James, this might help you. So this was one of South
Africa's best players at the turn of the 20th century. Hansi Cronya? At the turn of the 20th
century. Oh, he is old. When you're saying turning the 20th century, you don't mean from the 20th
to the 21st, you mean? Exactly. I think that's pretty ambiguous, to be honest. You're absolutely
right. It turns twice, doesn't it? That was that guy Smith, wasn't it? Was it? Oh, yeah. Yeah,
you're close. It was Sinclair. You got the right first letter. Was it two miles? Can I just guess
that as a distance hit? It's close. Times. Go on. Did they play it on the top of an enormous plateau?
And so the ball was hit out of the grounds and then fell two miles. Or maybe hit it onto a rhino's
horn and then it stuck on the rhino's horn and then he gallops across the well. That's good.
That's closer. I can tell you that. I'm going to say it lands on the back of a truck and the
truck drives off and it takes it 50 miles. Dan's done it. He's absolutely nailed it with the reason.
He hasn't gone far enough. It was 560 miles. It landed on the back of a coal truck on a railway
track. I'm going to allow truck and it travelled from Joberg to the Cape before being retrieved
and that counts for the long distance in history. Do you know that there is only one person who has
ever appeared in World Cups in two different spots in the same year? That's interesting. This is only
in 2003 so quite recently. It's a Namibian guy called Rudy Van Vuren and he appeared in both
the Cricket World Cup and the Rugby World Cup for Namibia in the same year. That is really cool.
Until you find out that he lost all six games of cricket by a total of 813 runs
and lost all four rugby games by a total of 282 points. Oh boy. That is the equivalent of when
Bart Simpson plays a dozen grandmasters at chess and loses to every single one of them.
Still, if you didn't tell us that extra bit. It's still amazing. Do you know when the first ever
cricket match, international cricket match, was played in Albania by an Albanian team?
Do I know when that happened? It would be an old piece of information for us to have stored
unless we just... Really? It's not the classic where where you went.
Was it one of the turns of the 20th century? It was a bit after the turn of a century.
It's either going to be really recent or in sort of 200 BC. I know because Albania didn't exist
until after World War One, did it? I don't think. Well, okay. But it could have been the foot what
was what turned into Albania. What are we trying to guess? When the... 2015. 2015 is when it happened.
Oh, okay. 2015. And what happened again? Sorry. Albania had their first international cricket
match. It was the first time. And they played with, it was on the 24th of May, 2015, the Albanian
Eagles versus the international Lions. So not an official British cricket team. And the captain
of the Albanian team was the Prince of Albania, the Crown Prince. And the of the British team,
it was Tony Hawks, the comedian who set it up. Yeah. And the Crown Prince and his Albanian
team won the match. They won by one run and they were all out for 49. And the trophy that they won
was the Sonoran Wisdom Trophy, which is the trophy of the Cup. Isn't normal wisdom supposed to be
really popular in Albania or is that? Yes, he's incredibly popular in Albania. For some bizarre
reason, they love slapstick over there. And I say that as someone who spent a bit of time there.
They love Laurel and Hardy. They love Chaplin. So Norman Wisdom fits in perfectly with that.
Do they have... Well, we have Wisdom's cricket almanac. They have Wisdom's cricket almanac.
Oh my god. Wow.
Okay, it is time for fact number three. And that is James.
Okay, my fact this week is that in 1682, Russia was ruled by two half brothers,
aged 16 and 10. A special double throne was built so they could make proclamations together,
but it had a secret window behind it so they could get messages from their sister Sophia,
who was literally the power behind the throne. Amazing. So cool. It is really cool. So how did
this window work? Talked to us about this throne. You'd open and close it. She'd put a bit of paper
in. Kind of, yeah. So there's basically behind where one of them sat, there's a little kind of hole
and normally it's covered with velvets. You can't tell whether it's a hole or not,
but the idea is that someone could be discreetly hidden behind there and they'd be able to kind
of whisper things to the young czars or they could possibly pass little pieces of paper or
stuff like that. Or if you wanted to distract them during a proclamation, you could poke them in the
bottom presumably on their speech. It would be in the neck. It would be stupid to put that
little velvet window by their arse. You're not going to get past many secrets to that.
Shall I give you a little bit of background on this Russian history really, really quickly? So
this is in 1682 there was a Tsar called Fyodor and when he died, the country was in a bit of a
shambles. He was, he wasn't really able to rule. He'd sent the army into loads of stupid campaigns
and he'd left no heir. And so it was up to the nobles to fill the throne and you had two families,
the Naryshkins and the Miroslavskis, who basically hated each other and they had to decide who was
going to take the throne between them, which family. So the Duma, who was the Russian parliament,
they had to basically pick one. They had to basically choose who was the right horse and
they would say we'll go for them. The Miroslavsky candidate was Ivan, but he was quite sickly.
So they decided not to go for him. They went for the guy from the Naryshkin family called Peter,
who later would become Peter the Great. So Sofia was a part of the Miroslavsky family like Ivan,
but she was really strong. She got the army on her side and she persuaded everyone to go with a
joint rulership. But so that meant that you had two rulers at the same time. And then she became
in charge of Russia. She fired the head of the army. Actually she had him executed. She replaced
the head of the army with one of her favourites. She took over most of Ukraine. She took over Kiev
in exchange for helping Poland against the Turks. It was just basically all crazy kind of game of
throne stuff until Sofia went a little bit too far. She tried to get the army to overthrow Peter.
The army liked Peter, so they arrested Sofia, had her tried and compelled her to take the veil,
so she had to become a nun. And then Peter became the emperor and Peter became Peter the Great.
He loved sending people to the Naryshkin family. It was a real classic Peter the Great power move.
So not only did he send Sofia there, he sent her sisters along there as well, at least two of them,
maybe more. And he also sent his own wife to a nunnery later on, because he seems to have been
bored of her basically. So he was terrible. No, that was Ivan who was the terrible. Peter was
the great. Easy mistake to make. Well, Peter is not great in my opinion. I think we need to rename
him. He was a horrible guy. Peter the Dickhead, I think. He was someone who basically just killed
people in the most brutal ways. Disagree. I mean, what do you mean disagree? What was the great bit?
I mean, he'd had a very traumatic upbringing, and it was not an especially decent bit of human
history. I don't think he was especially worse than many of his predecessors, to be honest.
It was Zaris Russia. You accepted gruesome killings, but I want to hear about one of the
gruesome killings. But also the great part was because he modernized the country, I think,
more than him not killing people. Can we get some good bitching from Dan, though?
No, we've actually covered him quite a lot with his atrocities back. We mentioned that he was
very much into anatomy, so he would go to the headings and he would study the bodies of people
that were killed. And when he had one of his ex-girlfriends murdered by having her head chopped
off, he then picked up her head and explained about the windpipe and so on, literally in the
moment to a crowd like a TED talk. Just interestingly, this is where this happens,
and then he kissed her on the face and then popped her down on the floor. That's a dickhead to me.
Just on Sophia, a tiny bit about her, she was known for being kind of shrewd and clever and
skillful, wasn't she? Which I guess is how she wielded all this power. But she was not very
favourably reported on it in other ways, so there was a French diplomat called Foy de Lanneville
who wrote about her, who acknowledged that she was very shrewd. He said, "As much as her waist is
short, wide and rough, so her mind is thin, shrewd and skillful." Which, actually, when you look
at it like, what is a thin mind? What is that? I don't know. But he did write of her, "She is terribly
fat, has facial hair, lupus on her legs, is at least 40 years old, and has a head the size of
a pot." What a vague way of describing someone, because pots are not a standard size. That's
stupid. It's like saying, "I have a foot the size of a shoe."
Wow. Yeah, maybe pots were all one size in those days. But that's one of the innovations Peter
the Great had, of course, is the Great Pot Revolution, where he introduced different size pots.
They called him Potter the Great, actually, for a lot of his time. So, this fact is about
thrones, and this sort of weird double throne that they had. I didn't know that when you're
becoming king or queen in Britain, you don't sit on a throne. You sit on a chair. It's called
the coronation chair, and it's explicitly not a throne. So, do we not have a throne? Is that
what you're saying? No, they've got buckets of thrones, actually. But this particular
thing. It used to be not looked after especially well. So, it's the oldest bit of furniture in
England made by someone who's known, who's named, someone called Walter of Durham. But it was in
such bad nick that in Westminster Abbey in the 18th century, you could have a go at sitting on it
for a small payment, if you just paid a verdure or something. And it's even got carved into the
back of it, graffiti from all the people who visited. So, somebody wrote, "P. Abbott slept
in this chair 5th to 6th July 1800." That's the official coronation chair of the whole country.
What I find really weird about that is that all those bits of graffiti are quite old, aren't
they? Like you say, they're from the 18th century or even maybe a little bit after that. But they're
from around then. But in 1914, the chair was blown up by the suffragettes. As in, they put a bomb
there and bits fell off it. And so, they decided to put it all back together. But they decided
not to get rid of any of the graffiti. Isn't that weird? They thought all the graffiti was part
of it now, but you would think that a coronation chair shouldn't have P. Abbott slept here.
I like the fact that the coronation chair was specifically made to, in order to accommodate
the stolen coronation chair of the Scots, which does make you understand why some Scottish people
aren't massively keen. But it was, so it was literally built so that underneath it, it could
contain the stone of schoon, which is basically the throne of the Scots. And I had never read about
when the Scots stole the stone of schoon back in 1950. I've never read the story, but there may be
people who remember this. So, this was a huge deal. It was back in 1308, when it was taken back down,
when Edward I, the hammer of the Scots, defeated the Scots. And he had the English throne or
coronation chair built in order to sit on top of the stone of schoon. And in 1950,
four Scottish students managed to break into Westminster Abbey on Christmas Day
and steal it back. But it sounds hilarious. So, they broke in and according to one of the guys,
they went in and it weighs 25 stone. So, it is quite a heavy stone. And they picked it up,
dropped it, it's split in two. And the ringleader, for whom this presumably is the most precious
thing he can imagine, said, "I was absolutely delighted when I realized we'd broken it because
it made it much easier to transport." And then they smuggled it back up. And that's the last time
the border between Scotland and England has closed is in 1950, they shut the border in order to try
and stop it from getting across, which is something. But it does come back now, right? It visits,
it visits the throne. So, yeah, it's now back in Scotland. But if there's a coronation,
it comes back down. So, one of the students Anna died just last year. He was called Alan Stewart
and he was alive until last year. Oh, wow, really? Yeah. And it was really exciting. They buried it,
actually. They took it to Kent and they just buried it in the ground saying, "Police are going
to be looking for a stone, so we will hide it." And then the fury died down and he just subtly
drove back down to Kent to collect it from where they had hidden it. But when they got there,
there was a gypsy encampment right where the stone was. So, he couldn't just dig it up. He just
couldn't just march into there. So, he had to sort of negotiate and say, "By the way, can I
dig up the stone?" There's two weird things about that. First of all, if you're going to break into
Westminster Abbey, I think Christmas Day is not their quiet day, is it? You want to go on a Thursday
when no one's in Westminster Abbey, don't you? That's so weird. How heavy did you say it was?
It weighed about 25 stone. How many kilograms is that, do you know?
Oh, I don't work. Is it 2.2? 2.2 kilograms in a stone, something like that.
That's pounds and pounds of kilos. Oh, so it's way more than that.
Two big men. It's one extremely fat man. It's 160 kilos.
Yeah, 158.7. Oh my god. I tried to lift 154 kilo stone when I was in Iceland earlier this year.
What they had is, when you're an Icelandic, let's say Viking, and you wanted to get on a ship,
they would have all these stones and whichever one you could lift up would tell you which
job you were going to have on the boat. So, if you could lift the lightest one,
then you could only be like a cock or something. And if you could lift the heaviest one,
then you could be like one of the main rowers. And the heaviest one was 154 kilograms.
And not only could I not lift it, I mean, I couldn't even push it a millimeter from where it was.
It's just so heavy. Well, imagine something four kilos heavier than the stone you couldn't lift,
James. That's what they had to lift. Surely, why would you want to be one of the main rowers
on a ship when you can get a cushy job in the kitchen by failing to lift a stone? There must
have been a lot of big beefy guys saying, "Oh, no, I can't possibly lift that. That's really heavy."
I think there's quite a lot of honor in being able to lift them. Because, for instance,
when I tried to lift them and I had a whole load of Taurus watching me to see if I could do it,
I must have it. I didn't feel like throwing it. I feel like I was really going to try my absolute
hardest. Well, you would have been useless on this expedition.
I was just looking about the idea of people taking up the throne, people being handed to,
and Albania actually offered up the throne to someone who was not Albanian.
They offered it up to, no, but close to what I was saying earlier, C. B. Fry, C. B. Fry,
who was captain of the England cricket team. So, we almost had an English cricketer as the
head of Albania years before they even thought to play an international match and set up the
Norman Wisdom Cup. Why? Have you just typed Albania cricket into Google a thousand times
for this podcast? Do you know who the youngest monarch in the world is at the moment?
You can't guess it. Oh. Because he is the king of an area of Uganda. So, he's not super famous.
He's called King Oyo. He's 28 years old, and he's from Toro, which is a kingdom in Uganda.
But he came to power at the age of just three. Okay. He now rules over 3% of Uganda's population,
and at his coronation, he was sat on the throne, playing with a toy car all the way through,
kind of fidgeting. And at one stage, when there was a speech by the president,
Mussavini, he started crying, jumped off the throne, and ran to his mother's lap.
He controls 3%. He's in charge of 3% of the population of Uganda. So,
another percent with every age that he goes. Yeah, that's how it works. It's a very weird
political system they've got in Uganda, actually. The Queen is so close to having all of the UK.
She's got 90-something percent. He was visited by Nelson Mandela when he was very young,
and Nelson Mandela had to wait in the VIP tent until he'd finished playing with all of his toys
and agreed to come out and meet Nelson Mandela. But now, he's a goodwill ambassador for HIV and
stuff like that. So, he's quite awesome, actually. Cool. I will see now. 28, doesn't he? Yeah.
And he said that he said the reason that he ran into his mother's lap is because they tried to
put a lion's skin crown on him, and he was scared of it. And then the next day after his coronation,
age three, he had to attend a cabinet meeting.
Wow, sweet.
Okay, it is time for our final fact of the show, and that is Anna.
My fact this week is that if an octopus's arm comes off,
it will keep picking up food and trying to put it where its mouth used to be.
Wow. So, I misread this when you sent it around. Yeah, I thought the octopus
will keep picking up food, and I was like, "How can it do that? It hasn't got an arm left."
But you mean the arm, the dis-attacked, the disembodied arm picks up the food?
The arm, the dangling modifier. Very badly phrased fact. Had a week to think about it and yet.
A dangling modifier could be that arm, couldn't it? Yeah, it feels like it.
Yeah, the arm itself will keep picking up food, and it's not the end of the world
if an octopus's arm falls off. So, don't worry about that at home. As we've mentioned before,
they can regrow their arms. And they've got seven more. We should point that out.
They've got plenty to go around. And this was discovered in a study where
there was an octopus's arm was amputated, and they realized for about an hour after they are
severed, or more than an hour, then they still operate like a normal arm. So,
they'll recoil if they're touched or if something scary is stroking them,
and they will pick up food and then drop it in the mouth that doesn't exist. So, presumably,
they'll pick up a bit of food and then turn around to see the same bit of food they're behind
them picking up again and continuing that comedy routine. You know that kind of thing where you
have like phantom arm syndrome, where you lose your arm and you kind of think it's there? It's
almost the opposite of that, isn't it? The arm has a phantom rest of body syndrome.
So, I really think that two-thirds of their neurons are in their arms,
and the arms are sort of running independent to the other arms as well. They don't necessarily
know what the other arms are doing. But so, does that mean that if I was the octopus,
I would just have an arm feeding me whenever it wanted to feed me, as opposed to me?
Would I be mid-chat and it's trying to force feed me some fish?
It's really interesting. Possibly. Well, they've done a lot. No one really knew this until quite
recently, and they've done a study quite very recently where they had like a maze, and when I
say maze, it was like a tube with two bits going off like a letter Y. And they taught the octopuses
to always put their hands down one of these tubes, because that's where the food is, and the other
one was always empty. And what they found was that when they learned how to do that with one
tentacle, and then they put another tentacle in, then that tentacle knew how to do it as well.
And what that tells us is not that they can't work independently, but that they definitely
are able to work as a group as well. So, if you teach your arm to do one thing,
the other arm will also know how to do it. So, they're not completely independent.
They can act independently, but they also have, they can talk to each other. So,
they wouldn't just feed themselves without, you know... I'm actually surprised they had to do
a study into that. I mean, surely, obviously, an octopus's whole body is acting as a whole body?
No, no, no. Well, not always. So, this is the really weird thing. So, they do... So, they have
molecules which stops the skin sticking to itself, because obviously, they've got suckers all over
them. But octopuses are able to pause those molecules if they want to grab another octopus,
which they sometimes do. They're able to pause the bit which stops them sticking on to each other,
right? But that is a glitchy system in an octopus. Sometimes, the off switch doesn't work. And so,
there is conflict between octopus-central and octopus-arm brain sending different signals about
whether or not they can touch another bit of skin. And so, they will sometimes dance around
an object for minutes on end while they're working out this kind of laggy computer system
inside themselves. And they're just... You can't work out what they're doing, and neither can they.
Very frustrating. So weird.
Some researchers say that different arms have different personalities.
But they'll say things like, "So, some arms will be more confident than others, so you'll maybe show
it a new teddy bear or something. And the front arms are often a little bit more confident than the
back arms. So, they'll reach towards it, whereas the back ones will recoil away."
That's amazing. That is incredible.
So, if you're sat at the dinner table with an octopus, and you've got a pissed-off right arm,
but a really fun party flat-arm, you want to be on that side of the table.
I should say I read this in a magazine called New Issue, which is brilliant. My friend gave it to
me, and it's the big issue North is releasing this four times a year, and it's a beautiful
magazine full of excellent long reads. So, highly recommend.
One thing that's been in the news quite a lot in the last couple of weeks, and when I say news,
I don't mean, you know, most news. I mean, the kind of news that I read, and that is the octopuses
that have started punching fish in the heads when you were saying about personalities in different
arms. And it seems that some octopuses, they will look for fish with other fish. So, the fish are
trying to find food, and the octopuses are trying to find food, and they all kind of work together.
But sometimes, if one of the fish doesn't do what the octopus wants to do,
then he just punches them in the head, and they just swim off. And the guy who wrote this study
was called Eduardo Sampaio from the University of Lisbon, and he said that whenever he saw it,
he laughed out loud and almost choked on his own regulator. And if you see the videos,
it really is quite funny to see an octopus punching a fish.
And it's sometimes when they want a bit of food, for example, but also it can be
for no discernible benefit. That's the other thing I said. It might be disciplined to say
stay in line and keep obeying me, but that's just a theory. It seems to be, they set out of spite,
which is just gorgeous. It's unbelievable. It's kind of like they're the villain in a movie,
and the fish is the stupid henchman who they keep on whacking. It's like the pinky in the brain,
almost. Do you know what bit of the human an octopus is most like?
As in what small parts of the human the entire octopus is like? Is that right?
Yeah, I'll say that.
Like your hand, because it's got lots of appendages.
No, nearly. Eyeball. Yeah, it's kind of consistency. Yeah, it's actually, Anna, do you want to have
crack? My mouth? You've been using it. It's, yeah, I mean, you have to see a doctor about the suckers
in your mouth. But yeah, I'll give you that one. It's your tongue. And the tongue is the most
like the octopus because they're both muscular hydrostats, i.e. almost every muscle that you've
got as a human is attached to a bone. And it's all, you know, you move by the bone of the muscle
working together. The tongue obviously has no skeletal support. It's just muscle moving itself.
And that's exactly how octopuses move as well. They compress fluid into one section,
and that creates movement in another section. So you've basically got an octopus in your mouth.
That's how they squeeze into tiny spaces, right? It's the same way that you can squeeze your tongue
into a coke bottle and get it stuck there. And an octopus can squeeze
into a tiny space. I think there's something like if, and now I'm going to work in kilos,
so James isn't confused, but 120 kilo octopus can squeeze into a pipe, which is about like smaller
than an exhaust pipe. So you'll have an octopus the size of a human, the weight of a human,
which can somehow squeeze through a tiny pipe. I thought that it actually doesn't even matter
on the size. It all just depends on size of beak and eyeball, because those are the only solid
bits of it. Although if you've got enough skin there, fold it up. I think people say it's just
dependent on beak, but you do actually have other substance to it that you need to fold up,
don't you, when you watch them go through. But yeah, it's basically down to beak size.
Do you guys know the artist Hokusai? You do? Yeah. For people at home, he's the one who did
the wave that you'll see on lots of, you know, Japanese, right? The Japanese tsunami famous.
He once did a woodcut of an octopus giving oral sex to a fisherman's wife.
It's a very famous one. And according to octopus experts, the animal doesn't look like it's enjoying
it at all. The wife, however. Well, the wife does look like she's enjoying it. I mean,
only search for this if you're not in work, like none of us is at the moment, but don't search for
it if anyone's looking at your laptop. And if you're one of our children listeners. Yeah, exactly.
But the woman does look like she's enjoying herself. But according to this was an article
by Diane Kelly writing in Gizmodo, she says that the northern Pacific giant octopus, which is what
this is, when it's amorous, when it's feeling horny, it will change its skin and it will become a
slightly different pattern. It'll have white spots on a red background. And this, this octopus
doesn't have that at all. And also that octopus always mates with mating arm. I think we've said
before that one of the arms is used for mating. But in this painting, their mating arm is actually
hidden right behind the octopus. So the octopus does not look like he's enjoying it at all. One
little bit more. He looks like he's devouring the woman. Are you saying that Hokusai didn't do
his research or that just he's maybe he did, but he's trying to depict something different to
what we think it's, it's called even darker than what you would have thought. I don't know,
Hokusai, I kind of like your earlier stuff where there was just a wave really good. I think this
is a bit of a it's called something like, I can't remember it's called something like the dream of
the fisherman's wife or something like that. So maybe it's the fisherman's wife's what she imagines
and she doesn't necessarily imagine everything to be completely, you know, biologically correct.
Hokusai can't blame the fisherman's wife for not knowing about octopus morphology. No way.
Was this the thing, James, that it was erotica involving sea creatures?
There is a subculture, I believe, online. I didn't search for this when I was doing my research,
but my understanding is that there, I don't know of anything earlier than this Hokusai painting.
A woodcut, sorry.
Dan, do you have a fact about Albanian cricket in this section? I'm just, I've been waiting for
it for ages and I just want to know. I'm holding on to it. When the time is right, I will lob it in.
Just while we're talking about sort of touching octopuses in a sort of nice way,
that's another thing that they share with humans. They get very, very huggy when they're high on MDMA,
which scientists have discovered recently. So they discovered that octopuses, when they did
a full genetic, what's it called, when they map the genes of an octopus. Yeah, and they found that
there was a serotonin thing that was very similar to humans. They were very surprised by that and
they thought, well, surely it doesn't respond because when we do MDMA and any kind of drug,
the serotonin levels go up and down and so on. They tried it on an octopus and they acted exactly
in the sort of lovey way that we might do if we were on drugs and they didn't expect that because
when we have octopuses in a lab, they often have to put them in different tanks because they're
very vicious. They're quite, they like their isolation and so they'll often eat each other,
kill each other if they're in the same tank, but then they discovered once they were on drugs,
they started hanging out with each other and hugging each other and you know, peace and love,
man. Yeah, so it was a bit very boring for the researchers, that experiment, because they also
were very tedious to talk to, weren't they? Six hours straight, just droning on about nothing.
Guys, I've got one fact about severed limbs, which this is about, right? Sort of severed limbs,
octopus arms, but except this is a human thing. This is a story from 2005. And it's that an American
man called Clarence Stowers, he found a severed finger in his tub of ice cream, right, that he'd
just been served, but then he refused to give it back to an injured employee so it could be
reattached to the employee because he wanted it as evidence in legal action against the store.
And what happened was, he found a chewy object in his ice cream, he thought it was an ingredient,
he realised it was a finger. The employee had just lost his finger in a machine used to beat
the ice cream. So his colleagues were rushing to help the man who'd lost a finger, but one of the
guys at the ice cream parlor hadn't noticed and unknowingly served the finger up to Mr. Stowers.
I didn't think we even sold raspberry ripple, but fine. And then a week later, he repented and he
said, all right, you can have the finger back, which is obviously completely pointless by that
stage. Oh my God. The employee was pointless as well, wasn't he? There was a bunch of
pointing going on anyway. Can you identify the man who ate your finger? No. Okay, that's it. That
is all of our facts. Thank you so much for listening. If you'd like to get in contact with any of us
about the things that we have said over the course of this podcast, we can be found on our Twitter
accounts. I'm on @Shrieberland, Andy, @AndrewHunterM, James, @JamesHarkin, and Anna, you can
in my podcast at qo.com. Yep, where you can go to our group account, which is @NoSuchThing, or you
can go to our website, NoSuchThingAsAfish.com. We have all of our previous episodes up there,
as well as links to bits of merchandise that we've released over the years, so check it out.
Otherwise, we'll see you again next week for another episode. Goodbye.
Hi, everyone. Just a very quick coda to today's show, if I may, where I'd like to clarify one of
the facts. So you might remember it was the study which I mentioned where autistic children were
put on rocking chairs and they didn't sink up their rocking. Well, that study does exist,
and it did happen. All of that's true, but what is very, very much not true is the fact that autistic
people don't feel empathy at all. That is not true. That is not a fact, and there's a very strong
implication made by myself that that is true. So I just want to make it really clear it is not
true that autistic people don't feel empathy. Now, a lot of people used to think that was true,
but there was a whole load of work done in the last few years that suggests what's happening is
very much a two-way street. So what we think's happening is that the autistic child does feel
empathy, but they display it in a way that the non-autistic person can't understand, and,
importantly, vice versa. So it's called the double empathy problem. And if you think about it, it
makes quite a lot of sense, because apart from anything else, communication is always a two-way
thing, isn't it? And neither person's perspective is more valid than the other person's. It's just
some people experience the world in a slightly different way. One other probably much more
obvious problem with what I said is that you can't possibly say anything is true of all autistic
people, because, as we probably most of us know, autism is a spectrum condition, which means it
affects different people in different ways. So that probably should have been a bit of a red flag
when I said that fact in the first place. Anyway, just like to apologize for not making all that
clear in the podcast itself. As you can imagine, I spent quite a lot of time this weekend reading up
about all the most recent theories on autism. But having said that, since doing loads of research
is not exactly penance for me, it's what I absolutely love doing. I've also made a small
donation to the National Autistic Society, who as well as helping families are involved in loads
of the groundbreaking research that I've been reading this weekend. So I hope that does clear
things up a little bit. And if it doesn't, then there's a whole load of research out there that
you can read yourself. And a good place to start is at autism.org.uk.
[Music]
[BLANK_AUDIO]